.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014-2020  Joachim Nilsson <troglobit@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd December 6, 2021
.Dt UFTPD 8
.Os "uftpd (2.14)"
.Sh NAME
.Nm uftpd
.Nd
No nonsense TFTP/FTP Server
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl hnsv
.Op Fl l Ar LOG
.Op Fl o Ar ftp=PORT,tftp=PORT,writable
.Op Fl p Ar FILE
.Op Ar PATH
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a very simple TFTP and anonymous FTP server with inetd support.  It
listens on standard Internet ports for each protocol, as defined in the
system service specification,
.Pa /etc/services ,
unless other ports are given on the command line.  For details, see
.Xr services 5 .
.Pp
Without any command line arguments
.Nm
serves both FTP and TFTP and automatically backgrounds itself.  Usually
.Nm
this means listen to port 21 (FTP) and port 69 (TFTP), serve files from
.Pa /srv/ftp ,
and log to syslog.  Messages are written to the syslog using the
.Nm LOG_FTP
facility.
.Pp
Available command line options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h
Show built-in help text
.It Fl l Ar LOG
Set log level: none, err,
.Ar notice ,
info, debug.  By default the log level is
.Ar notice ,
which is less verbose than
.Ar info ,
but still logs all relevant events: users logging in, uploading,
downloading, creating and removing directories, etc.  To reduce
the log level, start
.Nm
with
.Cm Fl l Ar error .
.It Fl n
Run in foreground, do not detach from controlling terminal
.It Fl o
Set
.Nm
option, separate multiple options with comma:
.Bl -tag
.It Ar ftp=PORT
.It Ar tftp=PORT
.It Ar writable
.El
.Pp
Override Internet ports otherwise derived from
.Xr services 5 .
Set the
.Ar PORT
to zero (0) to disable a service.
.Pp
The
.Ar writable
option enables writable FTP root, which is not recommended.  Some people
want this, but it is recommended to instead rely on a writable
sub-directory, like
.Ar upload/ ,
or similar.
.It Fl p Ar FILE
File to store process ID for signaling
.Nm .
The default depends on how
.Nm
was configured at build time, and also the UNIX system it runs on,
but often it is found in
.Pa /var/run/uftpd.pid .
.It Fl s
Use syslog, even if running in foreground, default when running in the
background
.It Fl v
Show program version
.It Ar PATH
Root directory. The default is to serve files from the FTP user's $HOME.
When started as root
.Nm
will chroot to this directory as a security measure.
.El
.Pp
.Sh Inetd
.Nm
can also be used with an Internet superserver, like the traditional
inetd or modern init replacements like finit.  In inetd mode the server
takes client connections from stdin.  To enable inetd mode
.Nm
must be called as either
.Nm in.tftpd
or
.Nm in.ftpd .
In inetd mode
.Nm
always runs in the foreground with syslog for messages.
.Pp
.Sh FTP
The file
.Pa /etc/nologin
can be used to disable FTP access.  If the file exists,
.Nm
displays it and exits.  If the file
.Pa /etc/ftpwelcome
exists,
.Nm
prints it before issuing the
.Dq ready
message.
If the file
.Pa /etc/motd
exists,
.Nm
prints it after a successful login.  If the file
.Pa .message
exists in a directory,
.Nm
prints it when that directory is entered.
.Pp
The FTP server currently supports the following requests.
The case of the requests is ignored.
.Bl -column "Request" -offset indent
.It Sy Request Ta Sy "Description"
.It ABOR Ta "abort current transfer"
.It CDUP Ta "shorthand for CD .. command"
.It CWD Ta "change working directory"
.It CLNT Ta "accepted and ignored by server"
.It DELE Ta "delete a file"
.It EPRT Ta "RFC 2428, extended PORT command"
.It EPSV Ta "extended PASV command, used by VLC for Android"
.It FEAT Ta "list supported features"
.It HELP Ta "show help text"
.It LIST Ta "give list files in a directory" Pq Dq Li "ls -lgA"
.It MDTM Ta "RFC 3659, return the last-modified time of a file"
.It MLST Ta "RFC 3659 extension to LIST"
.It MLSD Ta "RFC 3659 extension to LIST"
.It MKD Ta "make a directory"
.It NLST Ta "like LIST, but much less verbose"
.It NOOP Ta "do nothing, used for keep-alive"
.It PASS Ta "specify password"
.It PASV Ta "prepare for server-to-server transfer"
.It PORT Ta "specify data connection port"
.It PWD Ta "print the current working directory"
.It QUIT Ta "terminate session"
.It REST Ta "restore RETR or STOR command at file offset"
.It RETR Ta "retrieve a file"
.It RMD Ta "remove a directory"
.It RNFR Ta "specify rename-from file name"
.It RNTO Ta "specify rename-to file name"
.It SIZE Ta "return size of file"
.It STOR Ta "store a file"
.It SYST Ta "show operating system type of server system"
.It TYPE Ta "specify data transfer" Em type
.It USER Ta "specify user name"
.El
.Pp
Remaining FTP requests, as specified in Internet RFC959, are not
recognized at the moment.  Patches are welcome!
.Pp
.Sh TFTP
.Nm
also supports TFTP, the Trivial File Transfer Protocol, which is
often used for net booting diskless devices, e.g., BOOTP and PXEBOOT.
.Pp
The TFTP server currently supports the following requests.
.Bl -column "Request" -offset indent
.It Sy Request Ta Sy Description
.It RRQ     Ta Read Request for file, may have options
.It WRQ     Ta Write Request for file, may have options
.It DATA    Ta File data, preceded by block n:o
.It ERROR   Ta Error, end of session
.It ACK     Ta ACKnowledge DATA or WRQ without options
.It OACK    Ta Option acknowledged, sent as response to RRQ/WRQ
.El
.Pp
.Nm
supports TFTP blocksize negotiation, according to RFC2348, so full sized
Ethernet frames can be used, which greatly speeds up transfers.
.Pp
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/ftpwelcome -compact
.It Pa /etc/ftpwelcome
FTP Welcome notice.
.It Pa /etc/motd
Message of the day, presented after successful FTP login.
.It Pa /etc/nologin
Displayed to user attempting to connect.  Access is refused if this
file exists.
.It Pa /var/run/uftpd.pid
Program default PID file, created only when
.Nm
is ready with its internal setup and able to service signals.  Note,
.Nm
exits on most signals.  So no special processing is done atm.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ftp 1 ,
.Xr tftp 1 ,
.Xr syslogd 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was written by Joachim Nilsson
.Aq mailto:troglobit@gmail.com
and is maintained at
.Aq https://github.com/troglobit/uftpd
.Sh BUGS
Here be dragons.
